[🏋️ 3. Workout Manager]
Purpose Statement:
A fitness and diet management web app that provides personalized reccomendations and stores user data in a self-hosted database. A user will be able 
to enter their login credentials to access their personalized diet and fitness routines. I intend to make an evenly focused full-stack web application
and I will implement full CRUD functionality across all core user activities, giving users control over their fitness and diet journey.

Problem:
Many workout tracking tools require users to adopt rigid plans without personalization.
Users need a customizable platform that tailors workouts based on their own health metrics.

Inputs/Data:
User inputed health data. (e.g., weight, age, height, lifestyle, weight goals)

User base: Health-conscious individuals of any fitness level whom want to manage their workouts
and diet in one personalized, data-driven platform.

External API: 
wger Workout Manager: https://wger.de/api/v2/
-Exercise databases.
-Muscle group info.
-Pre-made workout templates.

USDA: https://api.nal.usda.gov
- ingredients for meal builder/logger
- All macros information

I will use this data with personalization engine to generate tailored recommendations for users.

Tech Stack:
1.) Authentication:  Bcrypt + JWT    Difficulty: Medium
BCrypt + Json WebToken will provide the tools I will need to authenticate users. I will pass a token to
the client stored as a cookie and will verify the token before using the payload to identify the user and service their request.

2.) Frontend: React.js          Difficulty: Medium
React efficiently builds modular, scalable interfaces. My app will benefit from:
-Reusable Components for tracking, data forms, and recommendation displays.
-Hooks, Custom Hooks, and Context API to manage UI state.
-Flexibility for integrating charts (e.g., using Chart.js for tracking and displaying various user metrics).

State Management: Zustand
Lightweight and lower learning curve than redux. A better fit for the size of my project.I will use Zustand for scoped,
component-level state in complex forms to centralize logic and (try to) avoid to much prop drilling.

Routing: Tanstack Router
File-based routing and integrated data fetching and caching. Seems to be easier to work with than React Router.

UI: Tailwind
Easy to use for inline styling of elements, great utilities, and greater control of design customization.

3.) Backend: Node.js + Express.js       Difficulty: Medium/Hard
Node.js handles asynchronous operations, which will help with fetching data from the external API and managing the personalized recommendations.
Express.js is lightweight and can manage user authentication, health data, and logged workouts. AI component uses Google gemini-2.5-flash to receive a
structured prompt from the backend with user data and provide recommendations.

Middleware 
CORS:CORS middleware is used to control and secure cross-origin HTTP requests between the client and server. It defines which domains are permitted 
to access backend resources and which HTTP methods and headers are allowed. This will be important for protecting my endpoints.

Zod: Enforces strict data schemas for incoming requests. It ensures that payloads such as authentication credentials, form submissions, 
and API inputs conform to expected types and formats before reaching business logic. This will prevent malformed data from entering my server, 
and provide structured error responses.

Recaptcha: Protects public-facing endpoints—such as registration, login, and password recovery. 
It will verify client-side reCAPTCHA tokens with Google’s API before allowing requests to proceed, adding an
additional security layer.

4.) AI Component: Google Gemini Microservice     Difficulty: Hard 
Prompt google gemini to provide recommendations from the wger api exercise catalog

5.) Database: MongoDB       Difficulty: Easy/Medium
Stores dynamic or evolving user data well (e.g., different combinations of health metrics). **No SQL**.
Example Collections: (these have changes A LOT.. Please see DB-Schema-Example folder for updated diagram)
users: 
  { _id, uuid, firstName, lastName, username, passwordHash, email, promoConsent, agreeToTerms, verified,   createdAt, profile[] }

healthTraits: 
{heightInches, weightLbs, age, gender, activityLevel, goalType}

workouts: 
  { _id, userId, intensity, createdAt, exercises[] }

exercises: 
  { _id, name, description, userId, type, intensity, createdAt }


meals: 
  { _id, name, calories, createdAt, ingredients[] }

ingredients[] inside meals: 
  { ingredientId, amount }

ingredients: 
  { _id, name }

6.)Visualization: Chart.js     Difficulty: Medium
Modern looking graphs and chart animations will provide unique and interesting ways to display graphs and
compare metrics over time.

Security:
- Bcrypt + JWT to handle secure sign-in. 
- HTTPS for secure data transmission.
- JWT handles both authentication and user sessions. Each client is provided a jwt refresh and auth token. Once
the short lived auth token expires, the user is redirected to the refresh endpoint automatically to be assigned a new auth
and refresh token. If the refresh token expires or doesn't exits, the user is redirected to the log in page.
- MongoDB access limited via JWT + token payload. If the user uuid or public Id is not present in the token, Authorization errors are thrown
by the back end and returned to the user.

Hosting:
Frontend:
Vercel for free website hosting.

Backend:
Render for free service hosting.

Database:
MongoDB Atlas for free db hosting


Actions/App Functions:
Custom Workout Recommendations – Create two recommendations based on the users current workout trends.
Comprehensive Tracking – Tracks meals and workouts.
Generates Charts - Generates charts based on the tracked metrics.
Nutrition Management – Logs your macros with a food database from USDA API.

User Flow: 
1. Register by entering personal data through registration form. (Privacy Banner: What is being collected and why?)
2. User logs in after registering or logs in via the log in page both provide the user with an JWT on success. (Bcrypt + JWT)
3. Gets AI-generated recommendations. (Stretch goal)
4. User logs workouts and meals via their respective builders/pages.
5. Reviews progress through charts and execute Bi-weekly AI overview on areas to improve. [Offer advice based on progress]

Desired Outcome:
Help users achieve their health goals through personalized, data-driven fitness plans.